se sentier exister.
conceptualiser

Philosophie    
    bleu = concept
    p87 concept (lat. reçu, saisi, former une perception, concevoir)
    def : idée abstraite et générale qui réunit les caractères communs à tous les individus appartenant à une même catégorie.
    Par abstraction, l'esprit peut isoler au sein de la réalité des ensembles stables de caractères communs à de nombreux individus et associer un nom à chacun de ces ensembles.
    notre principal moyen de maîtriser le réel (= le saisir !!!)
    Kant : concepts a priori / purs (indépendant de toutes XP) : conditions a priori de toute connaissance : constituent les catégories de l'entendement :
                unité / pluralité / causalité
           concepts a posteriori / empiriques
    ~=> notion, représentation, idée
    !=> objet, réel
    
    p70 catégorie (grec affirmer)
    def : notion classificatrice ayant pour fonction de trier [départager] , rassembler, encadrer les êtres, des choses ou des pensées (apparentés).
    Kant : catégories = concepts a priori, fondamentaux de la connaissance, rapportés à l'entendement.
    12 en 4 rubriques
        quantité    unité, pluralité, totalité
        qualité     réalité, négation, limitation
        Relation    inhérence et subsistance, causalité et dépendance, communauté
        Modalité    possibilité, existence, nécessité
    != Aristote
    
    p73 chrématistique (grec acquisition des richesses)
    def : (Aristote) acquisition de la richesse pour elle-même et non pour une utilité quelconque. Artificielle. S'oppose à l'acquisition pour satisfaire ses besoins vitaux.
    
    Lévinas Ethique et infini
Sur le besoin métaphysique de l'humanité [Broché]
Arthur Schopenhauer

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstraction
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concept

John Locke's description of a general idea corresponds to a description of a concept. According to Locke, a general idea is created by abstracting, drawing away, or removing the uncommon characteristic or characteristics from several particular ideas. The remaining common characteristic is that which is similar to all of the different individuals. For example, the abstract general idea or concept that is designated by the word "red" is that characteristic which is common to apples, cherries, and blood. The abstract general idea or concept that is signified by the word "dog" is the collection of those characteristics which are common to Airedales, Collies, and Chihuahuas.[citation needed]

John Stuart Mill argued that general conceptions are formed through abstraction. A general conception is the common element among the many images of members of a class. "...[W]hen we form a set of phenomena into a class, that is, when we compare them with one another to ascertain in what they agree, some general conception is implied in this mental operation" (A System of Logic, Book IV, Ch. II). Mill did not believe that concepts exist in the mind before the act of abstraction. "It is not a law of our intellect, that, in comparing things with each other and taking note of their agreement, we merely recognize as realized in the outward world something that we already had in our minds. The conception originally found its way to us as the result of such a comparison. It was obtained (in metaphysical phrase) by abstraction from individual things" (Ibid.).

Philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer argued that concepts are "mere abstractions from what is known through intuitive perception, and they have arisen from our arbitrarily thinking away or dropping of some qualities and our retention of others." (Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. I, "Sketch of a History of the Ideal and the Real"). In his On the Will in Nature, "Physiology and Pathology," Schopenhauer said that a concept is "drawn off from previous images ... by putting off their differences. This concept is then no longer intuitively perceptible, but is denoted and fixed merely by words." Nietzsche, who was heavily influenced by Schopenhauer, wrote: "Every concept originates through our equating what is unequal. No leaf ever wholly equals another, and the concept 'leaf' is formed through an arbitrary abstraction from these individual differences, through forgetting the distinctions..."[2]

By contrast to the above philosophers, Immanuel Kant held that the account of the concept as an abstraction of experience is only partly correct. He called those concepts that result of abstraction "a posteriori concepts" (meaning concepts that arise out of experience). An empirical or an a posteriori concept is a general representation (Vorstellung) or non-specific thought of that which is common to several specific perceived objects (Logic, I, 1., §1, Note 1).

A concept is a common feature or characteristic. Kant investigated the way that empirical a posteriori concepts are created.

    The logical acts of the understanding by which concepts are generated as to their form are:

        comparison, i.e., the likening of mental images to one another in relation to the unity of consciousness;
        reflection, i.e., the going back over different mental images, how they can be comprehended in one consciousness; and finally
        abstraction or the segregation of everything else by which the mental images differ ...

    In order to make our mental images into concepts, one must thus be able to compare, reflect, and abstract, for these three logical operations of the understanding are essential and general conditions of generating any concept whatever. For example, I see a fir, a willow, and a linden. In firstly comparing these objects, I notice that they are different from one another in respect of trunk, branches, leaves, and the like; further, however, I reflect only on what they have in common, the trunk, the branches, the leaves themselves, and abstract from their size, shape, and so forth; thus I gain a concept of a tree.

    — Logic, §6

Kant's description of the making of a concept has been paraphrased as "...to conceive is essentially to think in abstraction what is common to a plurality of possible instances..." (H.J. Paton, Kant's Metaphysics of Experience, I, 250). In his discussion of Kant, Christopher Janaway wrote: "...generic concepts are formed by abstraction from more than one species."[3]
